README.md, before:

# trl

Translate phrases quickly and efficiently on the command line using DeepL: A wrapper to using DeepL's API in a shell.

If you want to use this for your day-to-day translation needs, no major issues should occur with API request limits.

**Providing your own API key by signing up for free with [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/en/pro-api?cta=header-pro-api/) is necessary for this to work.**


## How to get

Download and add the script file to your `$PATH`. It features a shebang, to avoid having to call it with `python3 trl.py` or similar.

```sh
# While in a directory that is part of your path
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lmerz1/trl/main/trl > trl && chmod +x trl
```

Once you have your own API key, export it as an environment variable, for example in your `.{ba,z,…}shrc` file:

```sh
export DEEPL_API_KEY="your-api-key-here:fx"
```

Alternatively, please enter it into a separate text file in the following format, on a new line, and use the `-f` flag to supply the path to this file:
- In the file, put: `DEEPL_API_KEY your-api-key-here:fx`
- When using `trl`, add the option: `-f /path/to/API_KEYS.txt`


## Dependencies

`trl` is a simple Python script. It needs:
- Any `python3` version (this is technically untested, but any _should_ work)
- The `requests` module, i.e. `pip install requests`


## Options

- `-t`, `--target`: Two-letter ISO 639-1 language code – check with DeepL which languages are currently supported (links [below](#further-info))
- `-c`, `--content`: The content to be translated.
- `-s`, `--source`: (optional) Specfiy the source language, if necessary, for more accurate translations.
- `-m`, `--more_output`: (optional) Enable a fancier, longer output formatting including the input and language detection info.
                       Default output is the pure response text and nothing else.
- `-f`, `--file`: (optional) Path to the "config" file containing the API key in the format described above.


## Valid uses – examples

Both the target language (`-t`) and the content of the string to be translated (`-c`) **must** be specified.

```sh
trl -h
trl -t ES -c "Hallo Welt! Wie geht's?"
trl -c "What does Hungarian look like again..." -t "hu"
echo "hello world"|trl -tfr
trl -t en < query.txt > output.txt
```


Example output:

```sh
~ % trl -c "Can my terminal display a Japanese script?" -t JA
端末に日本語を表示できますか？ 
~ % 
```

and with `-m`:

```
~ % trl -c "What does Hungarian look like again? I forgot..." -t hu -m

    Request:
    Target language: HU
    >>> 'What does Hungarian look like again? I forgot...'

    Answer:
    Detected source language: EN
    >>> 'Hogy is néz ki a magyar? Elfelejtettem...'

~ % 
```

Typically, source language detection works flawlessly.
However, there are cases where the translated result differs depending on the source language, which DeepL might not be able to unambiguously recognize.
This can especially occur if shorter phrases or single words are to be translated, as in the following example.

In such cases, a specific source language (`-s`) in the request **can** also be specified:

```
$ trl -mt en -c uger     

    Request:
    Target language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

    Answer:
    Detected source language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

$ trl -mt en -c uger -s da

    Request:
    Target language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

    Answer:
    Supplied source language: DA
    >>> 'weeks'

$
```

This would of course also work without the `-m` flag's increased output/"fancy" formatting, but it has been included above as to demonstrate the difference in processing and output:

```sh
$ trl -ten -c uger  
uger
$ trl -ten -c uger -sda
weeks
```


## Further info

For more detailed documentation, see the list of [ISO 639-1 language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes) which are used for abbreviating the target language.
Check the [DeepL documentation](https://www.deepl.com/en/docs-api/introduction/) to see which languages are currently supported.

Not affiliated in any way with DeepL SE, but appreciative of their free API offering.

Commit message:

Add new option and roadmap to documentation
Also in the Readme, clarified the order of selection when supplying
multiple, potentially differing API keys at once.
This is not technically new stuff, as it had been documented in-program
already before, but another mention here can't hurt either.

README.md, after:

# trl

Translate phrases quickly and efficiently on the command line using DeepL: A wrapper to using DeepL's API in a shell.

If you want to use this for your day-to-day translation needs, no major issues should occur with API request limits.

**Providing your own API key by signing up for free with [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/en/pro-api?cta=header-pro-api/) is necessary for this to work.**


## How to get

Download and add the script file to your `$PATH`. It features a shebang, to avoid having to call it with `python3 trl.py` or similar.

```sh
# While in a directory that is part of your path
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lmerz1/trl/main/trl > trl && chmod +x trl
```

Once you have your own API key, export it as an environment variable, for example in your `.{ba,z,…}shrc` file:

```sh
export DEEPL_API_KEY="your-api-key-here:fx"
```

Alternatively, please enter it into a separate text file in the following format, on a new line, and use the `-f` flag to supply the path to this file:
- In the file, put: `DEEPL_API_KEY your-api-key-here:fx`
- When using `trl`, add the option: `-f /path/to/API_KEYS.txt`


## Dependencies

`trl` is a simple Python script. It needs:
- Any `python3` version (this is technically untested, but any _should_ work)
- The `requests` module, i.e. `pip install requests`


## Options

- `-t`, `--target`: Two-letter ISO 639-1 language code – check with DeepL which languages are currently supported (links [below](#further-info))
- `-c`, `--content`: The content to be translated.
- `-s`, `--source`: (optional) Specfiy the source language, if necessary, for more accurate translations.
- `-m`, `--more_output`: (optional) Enable a fancier, longer output formatting including the input and language detection info.
                       Default output is the pure response text and nothing else.
- `-f`, `--file`: (optional) Path to the "config" file containing the API key in the format described above.
- `-k`, `--key`: (optional) Directly supply the API key to the program. Not particularly recommended. Remember to keep track of and/or clean your shell history if necessary!

The different authentication options to pass an API key take precedence in
the reverse order they are listed here, i.e. `--key` will be selected before
`--file` will come before a `DEEPL_API_KEY` environment/shell variable.


## Valid uses – examples

Both the target language (`-t`) and the content of the string to be translated (`-c`) **must** be specified.

```sh
trl -h
trl -t ES -c "Hallo Welt! Wie geht's?"
trl -c "What does Hungarian look like again..." -t "hu"
echo "hello world"|trl -tfr
trl -t en < query.txt > output.txt
```


Example output:

```sh
~ % trl -c "Can my terminal display a Japanese script?" -t JA
端末に日本語を表示できますか？ 
~ % 
```

and with `-m`:

```
~ % trl -c "What does Hungarian look like again? I forgot..." -t hu -m

    Request:
    Target language: HU
    >>> 'What does Hungarian look like again? I forgot...'

    Answer:
    Detected source language: EN
    >>> 'Hogy is néz ki a magyar? Elfelejtettem...'

~ % 
```

Typically, source language detection works flawlessly.
However, there are cases where the translated result differs depending on the source language, which DeepL might not be able to unambiguously recognize.
This can especially occur if shorter phrases or single words are to be translated, as in the following example.

In such cases, a specific source language (`-s`) in the request **can** also be specified:

```
$ trl -mt en -c "uger"     

    Request:
    Target language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

    Answer:
    Detected source language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

$ trl -mt en -c "uger" -s da

    Request:
    Target language: EN
    >>> 'uger'

    Answer:
    Supplied source language: DA
    >>> 'weeks'

$
```

This would of course also work without the `-m` flag's increased output/"fancy" formatting, but it has been included above as to demonstrate the difference in processing and output:

```sh
$ trl -ten -c uger  
uger
$ trl -ten -c uger -sda
weeks
```


## Roadmap

`trl` is very robust and works flawlessly for me on a near-daily basis.  
That said, I do plan on abstracting the API provider out of the core logic at
some point, such that different translation engines may be selected by the user.


## Further info

For more detailed documentation, see the list of [ISO 639-1 language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes) which are used for abbreviating the target language.
Check the [DeepL documentation](https://www.deepl.com/en/docs-api/introduction/) to see which languages are currently supported.

Not affiliated in any way with DeepL SE, but appreciative of their free API offering.
